Inconsequential Materialities
The Movements of Lost Effects
David Bissell
University of Brighton 
This article is about the unintentional placement of objects. Focusing on items of clothing that have
been often accidentally displaced, this article ex plores the ephemeral, delicate, and often superficial
materiality of these objects of rupture relative to  a flow-optimized urban landscape. This article fits
into wider debates on ownerless objects, unintentional memorialism, and events of corporeal sev-
erance. Focus is on both the physical movements of these objects as they fold through the sur-
rounding environment and the affectual movements that emerge from their capacity to rupture
bodily experience by circulating particular forms of feeling. This article considers how certain acts
of intervention can transform these objects through movements of expectancy to create moments of
delight through reunion. This article makes a useful contribution in considering how particular
objects at the nexus of the human and nonhuman rise to prominence and through this how, con-
trary to the sublime or magnificent, small and intensely personal dislocated objects have the capac-
ity to move.
Keywords: materiality; urban; affect; clothing; movement
The inspiration behind this article emerges from a particular event that happened
just more than three years ago. It was dark, about two in the morning, walking along a
seemingly never-ending concrete path next to the dual carriageway that slices through
Salford. Crumbling tower blocks, boarded up flats, the sound of a ghostly police siren
ominously wailed through the curtain of drizzle falling onto this frozen, barren land.
And then, right in front of me, there it was. A tiny grey mitten in the middle of the
path, illuminated by the sodium lights above. Suddenly I was struck by one of the most
intense affectual responses I have ever experienced. This mitten resonated through my
95
space and culture vol. 12 no. 1, february 2009 95-115
DOI: 10.1177/1206331208325602
© 2009 Sage Publications
96 space and culture/february 2009
entire body. At first a tear, next a heaviness through my arms, then a slight weakness in
my legs. I turned to the person I was walking with, “Look! There’s a little hand that’s
getting cold somewhere out there. ” We looked at each other and an overwhelming
sense of sadness reverberated between us. For a moment, neither of us knew how to
respond to this event, the overwhelming affectivity of the mitten eschewing the nor-
malizing and condensing conventions of narrative. This particular event has left a sus-
tained mark on my body, and I have not been able to shake it off. It is events such as
these that I seek to explore through this article.
Through much work at the interstices of science, technology and society studies
(STS) and after-networks theory, objects take center stage. Running through this work
is a commitment to charting the various contingent relations and movements through
which objects emerge and the systems within which they are implicated. Objects of
clothing are one of the many forms that have received sustained attention. Much of
this work has taken a consumer-oriented approach by focusing on what happens to
these commodities as they move through systems of circulation and exchange through
the events of marketing, browsing, purchasing, and exchange (see, e.g., Clark &
Palmer, 2004; Hughes, 2007). Although many have researched the effects of network
disruption (see, e.g., Law, 2003), what is less apparent is what happens to these objects
when they cease to circulate through these commodity chains, not through their inten-
tional disposal but through their unexpected departure. Unlike chains of commodities
where objects are regulated, controlled, moved, systematized, categorized, and sur-
veilled, just what happens to objects when  they unexpectedly leave these actor net-
works and fall outside their jurisdiction, where their associations and relations break
down, is conspicuous by its absence in these debates. In response, this article charts
some of the movements of these objects when they unintentionally break away from
these networks. In doing so, it serves to work against the grain of a logocentric ren-
dering of agency. The particular object of clothing described here (Figure 1) might not
at first sight appear to be a very significant object of study. Indeed, perhaps the lost
mitten represents the apotheosis of insignificance as something that does not relate,
does not affect, does not influence, and definitely should not merit attention from pro-
gressive social scientists. However, through this article, and drawing on the empirical
example of the lost object of clothing, I want to demonstrate how these objects force
us to think differently about the enactment of urban materialities.
Although we might perceive a lost object that has fallen out of circulation as effec-
tively immobile, static, and left behind, this article traces and narrates some of the com-
plex intersecting and juxtaposed movements that these objects experience and undergo
once they have departed from these networks of intentional human agency. Most impor-
tant, this article investigates the juxtaposition of different qualitativetypes of movement
and their relationality in changing the materiality of the object. Rather than immobile, I
demonstrate that the object is in a state of flux through physical, virtual, and affectual
movements that are both prompted and experienced by the object. Although at times,
these movements can be conspicuous, at other times they are more subtle.
These movements are explored through five sections. The first section contextual-
izes what is implied by displacement and outlines the significance of clothing to this
article. It attends to how loss can be constituted both affectually and discursively. Loss
here is presented as that which is unintentionally immobile but has the capacity to
command particular modes of engagement with others, thereby setting up the lost
item as a particularly exciting object of st udy in terms of its effects on spatiality. The
second section proceeds to explore the materiality of these spatialities by investigating
the intersecting and juxtaposed materialities of the urban environment and lost
objects of clothing. Although the materiality of the built urban environment is typi-
cally obdurate permitting only certain forms of movement, the lost object of clothing
takes on a radically unplaced transient materiality resulting in an affective material dis-
juncture that requires an appreciation of how the immaterial folds through the mate-
rial. Through the lens of the baroque sublime, the third section explores some of the
affectual movements that might be precipitated by the object of clothing by investi-
gating the relationship between these objects and other bodies passing by. Through
their capacity to invoke absent presences, these lost objects can command particular
affective movements from other bodies that puncture and interrupt the everyday flow
of experience. The fourth section investigates the material movements of the objects
themselves and the parallel waning of affectual movement by attending to the trans-
formations that they undergo over time and illuminating their mutual implication in
other nonhuman movements. The final section explores further the relations between
physical and affectual movement by investigating how bodies can physically attend to
the object that can invest it with a renewed sense of hopefulness. Running through
each of these sections is a commitment to tracing how these objects transform and in
turn are transformed by their spatiality at varying scales.
Although at first sight perhaps inconsequential, the act of tracing some of the
movements of these objects of lost clothing serves to reveal a set of complex material-
ities that are absent in much social scientific thinking that deals with the materiality of
urban space. In doing so, it helps to problematize notions of scale that privilege more
obdurate materialities by demonstrating how small and intensely personal dislocated
objects still have the capacity to intensely  move, both affectually and physically. What
is at stake here is not just the fate of individual objects of clothing but the complex
processes through which we as social scientists elevate certain objects to prominence
in our work by investing them with significance. Following some of the movements of
lost clothing reveals how such a small object that is typically absent from the studies of
Inconsequential Materialities 97
Figure 1. White Mitten, Addycombe Terrace, Newcastle upon Tyne
Note: All photographs were taken during November 2006 at various locations. Although many images were
captured, the particular examples included in this article best help to illustrate the arguments made here.
urban materialities through its insignificance can occasionally rise to prominence and
have effects that are just as profound.
Displacements
This article follows from the growing commitment within the social sciences to the
problematics and challenges involved in thinking through events of the unwilled, unin-
tentional, and unexpected events that occur through everyday life and that saturate our
existence. These are events that are perhaps more difficult to theorize than the inten-
tionally willed because they cannot be predicted or determined in advance and as such
are thoroughly unplanned in their enactment in that they do not adhere to a predictable
linear sequence. More broadly, such work sets out to critique the pervasive intentional-
ism implicit in much social scientific work that prioritizes an ultimate human agency,
characteristic of but not limited to more realist and positivist accounts of worldly phe-
nomena. This decentering of the body and focus on the relational has emerged through
engagements with poststructuralist ontologies such as cyborg theory (Haraway, 1991),
complexity theory (Byrne, 1998), after-networks analysis (Hetherington & Law, 2000;
Latour, 1999, 2005; Law, 2004a), and performance studies. Although the unintentional
has also formed a central part of more structuralist engagements, such as the uninten-
tional outcomes in structuration theory (Giddens, 1986), these apprehensions prefigure
unintentionalism as a residual outcome of linear temporal sequences, thereby reducing
events to more or less determined phenomena. Similarly, contemporary cultural geog-
raphy’s engagements with nonrepresentational theory (Thrift, 1996) have also been
instrumental in tracing some of the events of the unwilled to further problematize
intentional human agency. For example, Harrison’s (2008) recent work focuses on the
nonagentive corporeal events of the unwilled illuminating how experiences such as
tiredness, hunger, and lethargy are central to everyday bodily experience. Similarly,
Hinchcliffe and Whatmore (2006) chart the multiple and shifting relations within and
between animate and inanimate, human and nonhuman actants that result in tempo-
rary and often unpredictable stabilizations.
The particular unwilled phenomena that this article seeks to explore is the event of
accidental loss. It is an article about ac cidental misplacement, specifically of clothing,
where an object that is normally located, placed, and known is abruptly and uninten-
tionally severed from these corporeal bonds and knowledges that serve to maintain
these often practical and sometimes meaning ful networks of proximate and distanti-
ated objects. It is the movements of these objects themselves that form the empirical
focus of this article as opposed to the affectual and emotional responses experienced by
their previous owners that one could imagine could range from disappointment and
frustration through to more intense anger and annoyance at the realization of loss of a
personal possession. In addition, rather than objects that are intentionally discarded by
their owners, where the placement of the object is actively mediated, perhaps through
the processes of disposal (Chappells & Shove, 1999; O’Brien, 1999), this article focuses
on the genre of accidental loss: the event of the unexpected and unwilled. Although the
materiality of the object might be similar, the particular trajectory of the accidentally
displaced object takes a rather different course. Implicit here is that the owner of the
object does not command unyielding agency over their proximal personal possessions.
In the case of clothing, the event of accidental loss demonstrates a movement of agency
from the body to the object of c lothing itself. This might be particularly unsettling
98 space and culture/february 2009
because clothing is perhaps one of the most tangible expressions of the outermost and
most visible layer of the body’s surface. Indeed, clothing is a particularly intriguing
object to trace owing to its multiple and diverse connections with bodies. The wearing
of certain clothes for example can serve to perform particular embodied identities and
modes of belonging (Colls, 2005; Tseelon, 1995; Y oung, 1990). In addition, bodies may
develop particularly intense emotional attachments to objects of clothing (Guy &
Banim, 2000). Because objects of clothing may therefore be personalized through their
wearing, through the generation of meaningful connections these objects sediment the
act of ownership of clothing to particular individual bodies. Further still, clothing
might be conceived of as a way of seeing and a wholly multisensory way of being in the
world (Bannerjee & Miller, 2003). Clothes as corporal extensions “absorb tears, sweat
and other bodily substances” (Allerton, 2007, p. 35) and so form an intimate relational-
ity with the body. As Woodward (2005) argues, clothing articulates a form of selfhood
“where clothing becomes a conduit that allows other people’s intentions to penetrate
deeply into the intentions of the wearer” (p. 22).
Accidental loss implies a corporeal relationship of unawareness where awareness as
conscious knowledge is lost, forgotten, and absent. T o the body, though, the object
remains with it until the moment of realization when the absence is registered. The
event of registration itself is felt through the body: the loss of a glove perhaps reveal-
ing itself through the sharp stabbing of coldness around the hand, the loss of a scarf
perhaps precipitating the immediacy of the elements around the neck. Importantly,
therefore, this moment is driven by corporeal sensation, where the absence of the
object is registered through and touches the body and might be folded through a mul-
titude of affectual responses. As Butler (2002) comments, “Loss fractures representa-
tion itself and loss precipitates its own modes of expression” (p. 467).
Although loss as an unintentional event can be explored from the sensate perspec-
tive of the haptic and affectual, its representational and discursive form has longer her-
itage within the social sciences. The politics of loss is a device commonly mobilized by
postcolonial theorists to describe the erasure of colonial histories (Spurr, 1993), the
loss of dignity, and discourses of alienation and absence that ensue (Kincaid, 1988). In
these cases, loss constitutes a set of social, political, and cultural relations associated
with the absence of territorial claim. In a related vein, this article fits into wider debates
on the management of lost objects that become severed from their owners and how
personal objects can be divorced from their respective bodies as in the case of museum
display. In the traditional model of museum display, objects removed from their orig-
inal communities are reclassified according to institutional processes of labelling and
categorization that serves to not only erase locationally specific attributes and entan-
glements (Clifford, 1997) but also lessen their intensity. Engagements with loss as event
are also framed around experiences of suffering and death as events that mark the
impossibility of recovery (see Dollimore, 2001). Although the loss of an item of cloth-
ing might not be of the same magnitude as the loss of a person (see Harvey & Miller,
1998), such work indicates how the discursive is intimately folded through the sensate
and affective experiences that emerge through the event of loss.
Although these works tend to focus on the qualitative effects of loss on the body whose
loss the particular affective engagement marks, in both examples the event of loss implies
a relationship movement that is bifurcated. As the body or time moves on, an object or set
of relations is effectively left behind and isimmobilized.Drawing on this context of loss,
what this article seeks to explore is what happens to these objects that are left behind. How
do they move, and what do these objects have the capacity to do to other bodies? Through
Inconsequential Materialities 99
this article, I argue that an appreciation of the object’s changing materiality, its “in-here
enactment” (Law, 2004a, p. 84), is central to understanding how it moves and what it
becomes. Indeed, it is the materiality of the unintentionally displaced object itself that is
central to how it might be perceived by other bodies. In considering the affective responses
that can be conditioned and precipitated involves thinking through the type of object
itself and what it is designed for, together with its visual and tactile form. In addition, the
placement of the object is itself part of the material assemblage comprising object and the
folding in of the proximate environment. The importance of this relationality between the
material form of the object and its particular proximate spatiality can be poignantly
demonstrated through the often-unintentional displacement of bags and luggage in pub-
lic spaces such as airports, railway stations, and shopping streets. In such locations, the
particular yet mundane material form of the bag or suitcase accrues a particularly threat-
ening form of agency and has the capacity to spark large-scale reactions. During such
events the particular object materiality changes, perhaps reflecting Law’s notion of fire
object as energetic and transformative that emerges through a particular configuration of
bodies and objects (Law & Singleton, 2005). Indeed, such is the power of these objects,
spatiality is often engineered to minimize these events of loss from occurring, perhaps
through the use of recorded announcements (Dodge & Kitchen, 2005). Although other
forms of corporeal extension such as clothing might be considered to be more personal
and intimate than a bag, clothing on the body does not, in the main, have the capacity to
circulate such a fearful set of affects. The particular and unintentional location of where
the displacement occurs is therefore instrumental in amplifying or dampening the partic-
ular set of affective responses.
I want to argue that the way that lost objects of clothing move, both physically and
affectually, relies on the juxtaposition of two very different materialities that involves
looking more closely at both the materiality of the clothing and the proximate spatial-
ity that surrounds them. Where the materiality of the urban landscape, particularly
pavements and roads where these items are commonly located, is optimized for par-
ticular flows, the materiality of lost items of clothing jars and punctuates this by pre-
senting a stark object of rupture to these flows. In the following section, I explore this
material disjuncture by considering these conflicting materialities in greater detail.
However, to narrate their interrelations and they ways that these objects press on bod-
ies involves thinking through materiality that incorporates the concrete and tangible
aspects of experience with the affectual.
Materialities
T o explore how these objects have the capacity to do things to other bodies requires
an appreciation of the materiality of the surrounding spatiality as this in part informs
the materiality of the object itself. Many of these displaced objects of clothing come to
be located in particular spaces in the urban environment: on pavements, in gutters, on
roads. The materiality of these realms of the urban landscape takes on a particular form
that is typically framed around movement and flow. Indeed, much work on urban
mobilities highlights how these spaces are often defined by their capacity to permit par-
ticular intersecting mobilities. The built form of many urban areas, particularly their
centers, is characterized by smooth surfaces permitting and mobilizing the efficient flow
of people, vehicles, objects, commerc e, and information. Particular sensibilities of
movement are engineered into this urban materiality that can be acoustic, visual (Fuller,
100 space and culture/february 2009
2002), and tactile (Pallasmaa, 2005) to streamline rational and efficient flows (see Hillier
& Hanson, 1984). The materiality of the urban environment is often intentionally engi-
neered to both permit and restrict particular physical and virtual movements (Graham
& Marvin, 2001; Koskela, 2000), often with overtly productivist political and economic
agendas. This effective streaming of movement through the built form is even more
pronounced in places of transience such as bus stations (Flyvbjerg, 1998), railway sta-
tions, and airports (Adey, 2004, 2008). In each of these spaces, the specific materiality
provides the conditions of possibility for the emergence of particular modes of presen-
tation and performance. These approaches to urban materiality tend to privilege the
more concrete materialities of architectural form: the visible and tactile surfaces of the
city that are rendered tangible through layers of grit, cement, brick, stone and gravel. In
contrast to other material forms, these tangible materialities of the urban environment
share a particular characteristic in that they are overwhelmingly obdurate. With some
exceptions, their materiality is solid, hard, and, most importantly from a financial per-
spective, durable to both the elements and other pressures inflicted on its surface, albeit
within a narrow temporal window (see Ingold, 2004).
In spite of the emphasis on flux, flow, and fluidity within contemporary social sci-
ence, only a narrow set of actants are actually mobile and free to traverse these surfaces,
and again these are traversed often only within narrow and often predictable parame-
ters. Here we might think of the highly mobile but often predictable movements of
pedestrians, vehicles, rain, and information that course through the veins of the city.
Bus stops, paving slabs, traffic signs, walls, and buildings themselves are soldered to the
earth and are not designed to move or be moved. Such objects function as Urry’s (2003)
immobile moorings that provide the conditions for mobility. Indeed, intentional
mobilities such as planes, trains, and buses require these contingent and relative immo-
bilities for their functioning (Adey, 2006). This results in an urban landscape that is
mobile yet anchored through a particular configuration of obdurate materialities.
Importantly for thinking through the materiality of lost items of clothing, these
moorings are secured further through the removal of unintentionally mobile objects
that are free to move in the absence of willful human agency: those mobilities that
impede the efficient enactment of intentional mobilities. Here we could think of how
leaves on railway lines or snow and rain on roads might result in large-scale disruption
to mobile systems. Other unintentional mobilities such as litter also work to disrupt
the capacity of urban environments to induce particular ways of feeling, the uninten-
tional movements of waste serving to create a particular undesirable set of materiali-
ties. As Hawkins (2006a) suggests, waste is “irrelevant, dirty and disorderly” and is that
“which must be expelled and disposed of” (p. 315). Because these unanchored mobile
materialities serve to disrupt the engineered and controlled aspects of the urban envi-
ronment, they can be mobilized in ways that are both unpredictable and sometimes
threatening. Such materialities serve to reaffirm “the stasis of the order of value” of
other objects that are conversely “recognised socially as worthy or important”
(Hetherington, 2004, pp. 164-165). I want to argue that items of lost clothing enact a
very similar form of materiality to these undesirable superficial mobiles within the
urban landscape. Because they are not ordered, fixed, contextualized, or spatialized,
similar to leaves and litter, lost possessions are not rooted to the landscape and as such
they take on a radically juxtaposed materiality within this landscape. However, in other
respects lost clothes take on a wholly different materiality to other forms of transient
debris. Apprehending these divergent materialities requires attending to the specific
materiality of the clothes themselves.
Inconsequential Materialities 101
Although objects such as leaves and litter are already implicated within classificatory
regimes through discourses such as the undesirability of waste or the delight in the aes-
thetic pleasure of autumn leaves, the familiarity of these habitual encounters serves to
weave these objects into the everyday urban experience. In contrast, lost clothing occupies
a liminal place in that they are unfamiliar and defy these systems of routine perception
and interpretation. They are radically unplaced objects that do not belong in these spaces
because they have broken free from stabilizing networks. Unlike other transient objects
such as litter, these are not objects of intentional disposal. The materiality of clothing
diverges abruptly from both the materiality of the obdurate urban landscape and tran-
sient debris. The scarf here is isolated (Figure 2), its tangled form, intricate creases, and
elaborate folds rising up sharply from the coarsely pitted road surface. Items of clothing
such a this are soft and delicate because they are designed to act as an intermediary
between the body and outdoor environments. When worn on the body, items of clothing
are designed to relate to environments in specific ways. Although the softness of clothing
provides comfort to the body, when traversing through the urban environment the emer-
gent relationality provides protection to the body to shield it from the elements. Such an
appreciation for the materiality of clothing therefore transcends the traditional dualisms
that reduce these objects to either design or cultural significance (Miller, 2005). When
worn, clothing transforms the capacities of the body to act and perform in different situ-
ations within the urban environment such as being able to comfortably withstand a more
extensive range of environmental variables such as colder temperatures and stronger
winds. The effect of this relationship is to render the body less vulnerable and susceptible
to particular uncomfortable phenomena. The softness and intricacy of these items are
therefore sharply juxtaposed with the course obduracy of the urban environment. Items
of clothing are not designed to be withdrawn or released from the body. If, by chance, they
become displaced from the body, it is perhaps the material disjuncture resulting from the
severing of the relationship between clothing and body that is at the heart of how they
might be perceived by other bodies. This assemblage of divergent materialities, the obdu-
racy of the urban landscape, and the fragility of the lost item of clothing play a central part
in mobilizing particular powerful capacities or “thing-power materialism, ” as Bennett
102 space and culture/february 2009
Figure 2. Black Scarf, Biddlestone Road, Newcastle upon Tyne
(2004, p. 348) calls it, that the item of clothing develops. T o appreciate these capacities
requires thinking through this material assemblage from the point of view of their power
to assert themselves and to affect other bodies.
Drawing on an affective ontology enables us to consider more responsively how
these lost objects of clothing press against other bodies. In this conceptualization of
matter, the material is not equated with the visual and somehow “real” or as the mate-
rial and representational effects of discursive enactments. Indeed, such a narrow con-
ception of materiality severs the connection between the material and immaterial that
enacts the complexities and particularities of urban textures. T o consider how these
lost objects of clothing can affect other bodies requires attending to the juxtaposition
and interweaving of material and immaterial (see Philo, 2000). Such an ontology
appreciates the power that these objects have to affect others, a power that is inde-
pendent of the human subject (Amin & Thrift, 2002; Latham & McCormack, 2004).
Central here is a recognition that the particular material assemblage, created by the lost
object of clothing in the urban landscape, has the potential to act that is both excessive
and intensive.
The affective materiality that is enacted through the sighting of a lost object of cloth-
ing is not reducible to an reflexive emotional experience, although this is certainly woven
through how the encounter might be reflected on, but “plays out before [italics added]
the reflective event of thought kicks in” (Latham & McCormack, 2004, p. 706). Through
this rendering that moves away from human-centered accounts of vitality, the particular
materialities that lost clothes take on are always emergent through and in the process of
becoming something different through the encounters bodies have with them.
In the following section, I consider how these materialities can affect other bodies
and, in doing so, explore how these objects of clothing have the capacity to assert
themselves in very particular ways.
Absences
T o apprehend this event of affection where these objects press against bodies and
demand to be noticed, I want to consider how the trope of the sublime as an aesthetic
engagement can be actualized through the body as an event that demands a particular
affective response. The figure of the sublime emerged as a specific way of visualizing
landscapes at a particular historical moment during the 18th century woven through
discourses of the romantic. Particularly associated with the corporeal experiences of
moving through previously unseen landscapes, many travelers undertaking the Grand
T our drew on the sublime to describe the landscapes traversed (Van den Abbeele,
1991). Much contemporary social scientific literature that mobilizes the trope of the
sublime draws on the capacity of (typically  nonurban) landscapes to affectually move
their spectators. This affectual immediacy emerged through the capacity of the sub-
lime to circulate both terror and awe (MacDonald, 2001). For Burke (1970), the trope
of the sublime as an emblem of grandeur and power is a way of narrating the complex
and overwhelming sensations induced through that which exceeds our comprehen-
sion. Similarly for Schopenhauer (1967), the sublime in contrast to the beautiful is a
form of pleasure derived from the experience of being overpowered by an object of
magnitude as a mark of the observer’s nothingness. The objects that Schopenhauer
and many others have narrated through the sublime are typically awe-inspiring land-
scapes of magnitude such as mountains or oceans (see MacDonald, 2001) that have the
Inconsequential Materialities 103
capacity to remind us of our everyday smallness. Similarly, Kant’s (1951) sublime
emerges from the feelings of power and incapacity, the moment when “the imagina-
tion reaches its maximum and, in striving to surpass it, sinks back into itself” (p. 91).
However, the problem with this romantic rendering of the sublime is that it can be
perceived and determined without ambiguity. The perception of scale is sedimented
through this schema in that we already know what is big and what is small (Law,
2004b). The sublime here is predetermined on a hierarchical and clear-cut mode of
ordering and as such it presents itself as a static paradigm (Callon & Law, 2004). More
usefully, and following Latour, it might be more useful to consider Law’s (2004b)
notion of the baroque as a different rendering of the sublime through which no dis-
tinction is made among the individual, object, and environment. This relational ontol-
ogy inspired partly by Deleuze (1993) enables us to consider more fully the complex
web of relations that folds together places, objects, and people that moves beyond
thinking objects and spaces in terms of fixed coordinates. As such, these small objects
of lost clothing can be equally sublime through the way in which they have the capac-
ity to circulate an intense affectual response in the viewer. Rather than considering
materiality being limited to the finite tangible boundaries of the object, the baroque
sublime is enacted through the invocation of an absent presence. Geographical cop-
resence is not required for these other bodies, and perhaps the particular body of the
previous owner, to present themselves (cf. Urry, 2004). Rethinking traditional
Cartesian notions of spatiality and presence allows us to consider how the lost object
of clothing has the capacity to invoke other complex webs of relations. A lost mitten
might serve to momentarily make present a larger assemblage of other objects, places,
feelings, and people: perhaps the sadness of the cold hand or the of a disappointment
experienced by the saddened body of its previous owner. Indeed, it is this event of
extension and extrapolation that takes place partly on a nonrepresentational plane that
opens up infinite potentials of becoming for the object. Through the event of percep-
tion by other bodies, these objects distribute  themselves into other places (Callon &
Law, 2004), and through the movement of distribution the object embodies an exces-
sive number of potential scenarios. The absence of the object’s owner commands
agency over the body (cf. Hetherington, 2004), and it is these immaterial absences that
can work to provoke intense affective bodily responses that speaks to the sublime.
The immaterial presences that fold through the material form of a lost or displaced
object therefore have the capacity to provoke complex sets of affective responses that
present themselves in various forms. For example, the transient object of the displaced
bag in Hilary Jack’s (2003) work Turquoise Bag in a Treeevokes a sense of absence and
melancholia through its unintentional stasis in the urban landscape. Similarly, Bill
Keaggy’s (2005) 50 Sad Chairs (Hawkins, 2006b) have the capacity to induce a sense of
sadness that is both unsettling and compelling. Although the cataloguing and describ-
ing of these forms of displaced object may serve to impress and sediment a certain par-
ticular apprehension (see Montague, 2006), they perhaps answer Bennett’s (2004)
“enchanted materialism, ” where the spectacular emerges from the banal and mundane.
The body’s affective response to the displaced object is therefore folded through vari-
ous discursive strands of narrative that can serve to amplify or dampen the affective
intensity of the experience. Such narratives may emerge as a response to how that par-
ticular object might have come to be dis/located in that particular space. Displaced
objects such as scarves and gloves perhaps serve to animate and thereby circulate
between the object and viewer the arguably unpleasant sensations and coldness and
chill that are potentially being experienced by its previous owner. Furthermore, to see
104 space and culture/february 2009
small displaced objects such as the mitten that this article introduced at the start might
be more saddening because it prompts the sensate notion of a small child’s hand that
is cold. The precise object materiality has a marked impact on this narrative appre-
hension. For example, a more chilling set of narratives could potentially be circulated
through an encounter with displaced trousers and underwear (Figure 3). This partic-
ular collection of effects serves to alarm, disturb, and unnerve. They bear witness to
nudity and the perhaps violent disrobing of the body. They are not carefully placed,
folded, and arranged but have been hurriedly thrown aside and abandoned, perhaps
coercively. Other narratives are more sedimented in urban legend, such as the many
speculative theories that exist as to the presence of shoes hung over telephone wires
relating to gang activities in the locality or the passing away of a gang member.
However, although these examples reveal something of the differential apprehen-
sion of various object materialities, they are perhaps straying too close to the realm of
the intentional where the particular object has been placed or disposed of willfully.
Through these examples, affective intensities emerge as the result of the engagement
between the object and the viewer and the various fragments of narrative that are
woven through this engagement. Accordingly, these apprehensions are partly condi-
tioned through previous histories of the viewer. Nevertheless, and most important,
these encounters between the body and object are not organized, systematized events.
Any narrative apprehension is organized recursively because the unexpectedness
within the urban landscape serves to punctuate the flow of more or less habitual
everyday experience. The lost item of clothing presents itself as an abrupt materiality
that demands the body’s attention. It does not calmly or gradually reveal itself but
punctuates and aggressively interrupts the ongoing flow of bodily experience. Lost
objects seem to search us out. However, these lost clothes do not remain stable within
the urban environment. In the following section, I move forward to describe some of
the material changes that these objects undergo because these objects that have the
capacity to affectually move also have the capacity to relationally move in terms of
their configuration in urban assemblages.
Inconsequential Materialities 105
Figure 3. Blue Jeans and Navy Boxer Shorts, Norwich Station
Transformations
Considering the affectual and physical movement of objects involves a particular
attunement to temporality and the changes that these objects of clothing experience
over time. Although some have documented some of the various movements that
clothes undergo intentionally, perhaps through recycling (Norris, 2005) or marginal
sites of contemporary exchange (Crewe & Gregson, 1998), here I want to focus on the
various and process of transformation that occur in situ but are no less mobile.
Crucially here, the highly pronounced juxtaposition of materialities between the
obdurate urban landscape and the object of clothing does not remain fixed and stable.
The specific affective responses circulated through this material juxtaposition can only
occur while the materials are held in place for a certain duration. For example, imme-
diately after displacement, a glove might be pristine, colorful, and soft, laying on the
outermost surface of the urban landscape. The temporal proximity to the event of dis-
placement promises that the warmth of the owner’s hand might still be discernible. It is
not yet part of the obdurate urban landscape but rather an object waiting to be claimed,
inviting dialogue, and demanding attention. Indeed, this trace of immediacy of the
event of displacement precipitates a sense that the object does not want to be there. It is
perhaps this immediacy, the pristineness indicating that the event of loss took place rel-
atively recently, that circulates a sense of compassion for the object by other bodies.
However, this affectual immediacy is limited as the duration from the event of dis-
placement increases. In contrast to its dwelling with the body, where it is cared for,
washed, cleaned, stored, and placed, the object enters into a different temporality.
Through time, the relationality between the object and proximate environment shifts
and fluctuates and in doing so the material configuration of the object becomes trans-
formed. The materiality of the object moves in situ as the initial pristineness of the
object abates and goes awry. As the color fades, the dampening of this visual intensity
parallels a loss of intensity of engagement. Where a pristine, recently dropped glove
might command the attention of a passing body, a faded glove that reveals the
longevity of its wait may not invoke the same compassionate response. As such, some
of the qualities of disjuncture that may have prompted a series of fleeting yet particu-
lar affectual engagements with the object disintegrate, dampen, and lose their inten-
sity. Once-clean, pristine mittens become cold, soggy, heavy with moisture. Over time
a variety of other materials are collected and gathered into their lattice. Leaves, small
twigs, soil, and grit accumulate around the object. As Edensor (2005b) suggests, the
object loses its density as it becomes hollowed out. This movement of materials around
the object becomes an active narration that traces and documents the duration from
the moment that the object became dislocated from its owner (Figure 4).
This glove is involved in multiple movements that serve to fold and gather it into the
proximate environment. Here we might think of the physical geographical processes of
weathering and erosion as the object is exposed to the effects of the environment.
Through exposure to wind, rain, and the movements of other objects, the material fab-
ric becomes loose and frayed whereas the once-tight stitching is ruptured and speared by
twigs and thorns. Similarly, the passage of other bodies moving through the urban envi-
ronment can assist this gradual transformation. The movement of shoes over and across
the object can serve to perpetuate the processes of disintegration and erosion, scraping
and depositing other materials onto it. Through these multiple and interacting processes,
the object effectively becomes intertwined and embedded within its proximate environ-
ment. It becomes part of the rooted and more obdurate urban landscape. As the visible
106 space and culture/february 2009
traces of neglect become more evident, the object becomes more vulnerable, and as such
it not only loses the capacity to repress this ongoing process of disintegration but also
loses the capacity to perform its initial use value. Passing bodies may be less captivated
by a feral mitten, one that has mutated into something that cannot be worn. We might
think that the object is becoming hopeless in that as time passes there is less of a chance
that it will be acknowledged. As such, it is slowly dying: acquiescing and yielding itself up
to other agents of life or living?. Although the precise course and duration of this trans-
formation are not determined in advance, there is a recognition that the object will never
be the same again. There is no representational stability in that the relationship between
the object and proximate environment is in constant flux as its materiality changes.
There is no overall control of this process by any particular agent. It is wild, each agent
of transformation working on the object, overpowering it, consuming it. The overall
transition is one of unpredictability, and there is no clue given as to what particular
forms will emerge. As such we might think of it as a movement of intensified indetermi-
nacy (Hinchcliffe & Whatmore, 2006, p. 129).
However, the erosion of the object’s physical integrity does not imply a disintegra-
tion of other life forms. Although the object may appear to be dying, it is at the same
time also very much alive, the processes of vegetating implying both a waning of
intensity and a parallel aliveness and openness to become something else. We might
think of it through Law’s (2002) notion of a fluid object because its boundaries are
unstable and constantly in flux. The scarf (Figure 5) not only might have the capacity
to be an affective object but also might become a habitat, a refuge for a variety of
small vertebrates taking shelter below. But then again it might become a piece of waste
in the street, the unsightly mark of the negative end of consumerism. Or further still
it could present itself as a hazard, an impediment to the movement of people along
the street. What emerges is a variable object where “no particular structure of rela-
tions is privileged” (Law, 2002, p. 99): a chaotic blend of different nonhuman life
forms. As the object becomes colonized by these other life forms, “things get wrapped
around each other, penetrate each other, fuse to form weird mixtures and hybrids”
(Edensor, 2005b, p. 319). It signifies the promise of change and the potential for other
Inconsequential Materialities 107
Figure 4. Black Glove, Saddler Street, Durham
movements and relationalities to emerge. For example, although Edensor (2005a)
describes the potential for decaying buildings to haunt, we could conceive of how
these objects have similar capacities to haunt. These might be the unpredictable and
contingent involuntary memories that are “enmeshed in sensation and vague intima-
tions of previous atmospheres...slippery to describe and represent” (p. 837). This
event of haunting serves to fold through the past history of the object with the pres-
ent. As such, the past of the object is always coming back (see Wylie, 2007). In addi-
tion to temporality, the effect of this transformation goes beyond the physicality of
the mitten itself to envelop and gather in the wider proximate spatiality. The space
around the lost scarf bears witness to the event of displacement and transformation:
what the scarf once was and what it is now. As such, even in the absence of bodies, the
proximate spatiality haunts the scarf itself. The proximity to the object necessitates
that the wider spatiality surrounding the object testifies to the object’s transformation
through the event of witnessing. Although the scarf itself experiences a movement
and transformation through the emergence of other life forms, its relationality to the
proximate spatiality is unsettled: a liveliness that is emphasized through its erratic,
wind-driven movement.
108 space and culture/february 2009
Figure 5. Black Scarf, Biddlestone Road, Newcastle upon Tyne
Discoveries
Although objects of displaced clothing are enmeshed into various mobile processes
of decay and colonization by other nonhuman life forms, in the final section of this
article I explore how a particularly hopeful affective trajectory can emerge. More
specifically, I explore how the often knotted and always unpredictable movements of
these objects can be further unsettled through the intentional movements of other
bodies. I want to suggest that these movements by other bodies invest the object with
a particular affective charge that privileges a particular direction of becoming for the
object. Although many of these objects ultimately become woven tightly into the urban
landscape, their visibility decreasing as they become permanent fixtures, events of
intervention sometimes occur that provide the possibilities for new trajectories to
emerge. Such an event is often reliant on the affective impulse experienced by passing
bodies. This affective impulse takes place on a multitude of different planes, woven
through both the discursive and affectual: perhaps drawing on biographical histories
or stimulating a certain modality of feeling. Even though many people might experi-
ence particular affective and emotional responses at the sighting of a lost glove, they
might be fleeting, seemingly inconsequential, and attended to through the smallest of
glances. Here, the expressiveness of the encounter, where the object affectually moves
the body, is transient. T estimony of the event is embodied. There is no material out-
come that provides testimony for the encounter save the momentary affective impulse
itself. However, as more bodies experience this brief encounter, the spatiality of the
object is further remade. The impression of the object is carried through the trajecto-
ries of each body extending the field of relations created by the object. As Hawkins and
Muecke (2003) argue, these peripheral objects “can touch the most visceral registers of
the self–it can trigger responses and affects that remind us of the body’s intensities and
multiplicities” (p. xiv). The affective impulse experienced by a passing body might
prompt them to alter their performance, perhaps moving nearer to the object to take
a closer look. Further still, the body might make contact with the object and in this act
of reaching out invests the object with the chance of recovery. This contact may initi-
ate a movement of this new body–object assemblage so that the object is removed from
its initial resting place and comes to rest at a new location chosen by that body (Figure 6).
This intervention in contrast to the nonhuman transformations is therefore an event
of intentional movement.
Such intentional events bring to the fore our responsibility to act by considering
particular forms of conduct toward others in the urban environment. In a similar way
to Laurier and Philo’s (2006) bodies, we might think of the displaced mitten as enact-
ing a gesture to the world, an actant that requires attending to. The mitten presents
numerous questions about the type of conduct that might be performed. The perti-
nent question here seems to be what exactly to do, if anything? How should a body
respond to such an object? We might think of numerous possibilities through which
the mitten undergoes a material transformation, further changing the materiality 
of the assemblage comprising body and proximate environment. A mitten previously
in the process of becoming merged with the gutter might be picked up, raised, and
carried to a nearby wall. A pair of gloves previously split apart on a plateau of con-
crete can be reunited on a proximate raised plinth. The event makes the object more
visible, increasing the potential for the object to affectually move others and thereby
increasing the scale of its circulation. Echoing Laurier, Whyte, and Buckner (2001),
what emerges is a conversation between people who are unacquainted. The body of
Inconsequential Materialities 109
the mitten’s owner becomes present through the object itself: a spectral, haunting
presence.
This event of rescue and re-placement through the movement of the object there-
fore provides the opportunity for a new plane of intentionality to emerge from which
an intensified affect of hopefulness circulates: a possibility that at some time, the object
might be reunited with their previous owner. This hopeful materialism describes an
object in process, a process whereby value is invested in the object. Within this is a fear
that this event might not take place and that other trajectories will take hold: The glove
may return to becoming feral. Indeed, as Anderson (2006) comments there is a point
of danger “folded into becoming hopeful that indicates that a good way of being has
‘still not become’: in the sense that the present is haunted by the fact that the some-
thing good that exceeds it has yet to take place” (p. 743). However, the form of hope-
fulness invested in the object is made more durable through the choice of location that
endows it with a renewed quality of prominence. At eye level, the object becomes more
visible attracting the attention of other bodies and perhaps its owner. Such a raising to
prominence invests the object with a form of monumentality in the landscape. These
are not the affective iconographies associated with more traditional urban monumen-
talism typically folded through the obdurate materialities of grand statues in stone and
iron (Dwyer, 2004; Marshall, 2004; Mitchell, 2003). Y et these soft, fleeting, and tempo-
rary monuments are no less public and, most important, no less affective in their
capacity to circulate these anticipatory forms of hopefulness. Rather than a commem-
oration of a historical person or event, as a place of remembrance, these inconsequen-
tial monuments bear witness to a more vulnerable event of hopefulness (Figure 7).
However, there is still no guarantee that this event will produce a desirable outcome.
It is an event that rather than enacting closure opens up yet more trajectories for the
object to move. Although the particular trajectory of reuniting the object with its owner
might be the most desirable path, the question raised here is how far one should go to
reunite an object with its previous owner. Although we might raise a glove to a promi-
nent position in the hope of command the attention of the previous owner, regardless
of the value ascribed to the item of the owner it is unlikely that any more lengthy invest-
ment would occur. Rather than taking on the task of searching out the mitten’s previ-
ous owner, this gesture is a limited movement, comprising an evaluation of value and
110 space and culture/february 2009
Figure 6. White Mitten, Addycombe Terrace, Newcastle upon Tyne
price. However, this small financial value coupled perhaps with the undesirability of
other people’s clothes also renders it unlikely that any person other than the owner will
claim it. It is too personal and the resonances of the flesh are too immediate. Although
finding an expensive object might prompt the more honest of us to hand it in to a police
station, the mitten does not command the same respect. It remains a small, almost
inconsequential act similar to those described by Baumgartner (1988) through his cri-
tique of suburbia and the moral minimalization fostered between people. Perhaps this
is because the personal reward for finding a mitten does not induce the same sense of
gratification that is commanded through the finding and reuniting of a more econom-
ically valuable object. Or perhaps more acquisitively, it is because the reward for this
small act of placement is not reciprocal. Unlike other lost items such as a cat (Laurier,
Whyte, & Buckner, 2002), there is no immediate (and certainly no financial) reward for
placing a mitten, save moral accountability, and no interpersonal action takes place.
Even if the owner does find the mitten owing to its placement by another body, there is
no way of knowing or identifying this body. As such, the movement of lost clothing is a
beautiful event in that it is through the enactment itself and the traces that the enact-
ment leaves that a spirit of generosity and conviviality toward the unseen and unknown
other emerges. Even if the object does not become reunited with its previous owner,
investment in the object through a particular physical and affective movement renews
its material presence with a new form of hopefulness and the anticipation that a new
life will emerge, whatever form that may take.
Conclusion
T o return to the initial problematic, the object of lost clothing poses a challenge to
how we conceptualize not only intentionality but also consequence. Through STS
together with after-networks theory, the precise objects that are traced, and in doing so
rightly problematize individualist human-centered notion of agency, are often those that
induce particularly sizeable impacts. Although the objects themselves might be small, the
specific objects under the social scientific gaze are usually those that are deemed to have
Inconsequential Materialities 111
Figure 7. Red Mitten With Detail, Sheringham
certain political, economic, social, and cultural significance.Especially for the purposes of
grant applications, researchers must demonstrate how these objects have impacts that go
beyond their immediate spatialities to affect a significant proportion of the population.
As such, much work focuses on tracing through systems and illuminating those parts of
the system that induce particularly (and sometimes catastrophic) effects (see, e.g., Barry,
2002; Law, 2003). Importantly, these objects are integral parts of wider complex systems.
Objects that are enmeshed into particular complex systems of circulation receive prefer-
ential treatment because they are perceived to generate significant effects.
Objects such as lost clothing fall outside the lens of the social scientist because they
are perceived to have little or no consequence, save perhaps the temporary discomfort
of a particular individual. These lost effects are in this schema are judged to have little
effect. As with other lost objects, they are perceived not to move because they have
fallen outside of networks of consequence and significance. Although we could con-
sider how other forms materiality such as litter (Hawkins, 2006a) or ruins (Edensor,
2005b) have also dropped out of systems of intentional circulation, they differ from
lost objects of clothing in that they command and enact particular discursive and
political capital. More specifically, waste and ruins both answer to and circulate within
discourses of moral and capital decay. Unintentionally displaced lost objects of cloth-
ing do not command the same respect and attention through networks of governance
and control. It is perhaps easy therefore to conclude that these objects of clothing rep-
resent a radically inconsequential materiality. Indeed, admittedly at times throughout
this project I harbored certain misgivings about the responsibility of tracing some-
thing so seemingly inconsequential: a concern that was echoed and reinforced through
certain comments I overheard when this research was presented at a recent conference.
T o trace the movements of something so inconsequential as a lost item of clothing
might to some be anticipated as a wholly risible undertaking.
However, this article makes an important contribution to understanding the lives of
objects in that it forces us to rethink the processes by which we as social scientists assign
particular modalities of significance to certain objects. As this article argues, when tracing
through urban materialities, many have tended to focus on those object assemblages that
make things happen: those objects that are tightly woven into systems that are central to
their functioning, those objects that define, permit, and restrict particular acceptable
movements. In contrast, the lost item of clothing and its lack of connection to other
events, systems, and practices serves to disrupt the flow of experience. It provides a point
of radical puncture and has the capacity to command our attention more so than other
transient objects in the urban environment that through their habitual encounter we have
become more attuned to experiencing. These materialities have the capacity to affectually
move us: to rupture experience and leave a sustained affectual impression on the body.
They demand us to attend to those “intensities that are felt but not personal; visceral but
not confined to an individuated body” (Whatmore, 2006, p. 604). Indeed, it is perhaps the
denial of affect in STS as something that eludes and transcends networks that has ren-
dered these particular material presences invisible.
These items of clothing are at the nexus of the human and nonhuman. Their com-
plex materialities reveal many nonlinear relationalities between the human and the
nonhuman. They call us to consider the temporality of the encounter because even the
most fleeting and transient encounter with these objects can induce sustained effects
that persist over time. There is therefore no simple relationship between the length of
encounter and the magnitude of the effect it has on the body. Similarly, there is no lin-
ear relationship between the size of the object and its affective charge. This article has
demonstrated that in contrast to the traditionally sublime or magnificent, small and
112 space and culture/february 2009
intensely personal dislocated objects still have the capacity to move. This therefore has
large-scale implications for how we think through the transience and obduracy in the
urban landscape. It is an object of uncertainty because there is no knowing where it
will end up or what it will become, what networks it might become enmeshed into or
where it will be taken, both physically and affectually through encounters with other
bodies. It is a wild object that is highly mobile. Unlike other transient objects such as
waste, it is not accounted for and documented through the spreadsheets of municipal
service providers. Its trajectory is unknown and only hinted at through the traces it
leaves. We will never know where the mitten that this article began with is now, what
it has become, and what movements it experienced and prompted in the meantime.
This article has therefore illuminated how these objects have the capacity to gather and
fold through other places, people, and materials through their movements. This clearly
has implications for thinking through the spatiality of these objects and the various
and complex relations of distance and proximity that are woven through these move-
ments. Ultimately, this article has demonstrated that it is these more ephemeral, tran-
sient, and fleeting movements that have the potential to invigorate our practices of
narrating and coming to know the materiality of urban landscapes. The consequences
of inconsequentialities may be more profound than we might think.
